PEP 772: Updates based on conversations at PyCon (#4429)
python/peps: peps/pep-0772.rst

to all parts of this ecosystem.

Some expectations around the formation of a Packaging Council are that they
will:

* Work with PSF staff and the newly formed `User Success Workgroup`_ toward
  improving the user experience around packaging.

> * Facilitate a more stable packaging ecosystem that is more responsive to community input.

Author: > * Pronounce on and promote APIs, protocols, interfaces, and other interoperable standards relevant
  to Python packaging.

* Look for ways to use their direct authority as little as possible - seeking
  consensus and consent over voting.

To use its powers, the Packaging Council votes. Every Council member must either vote or explicitly
abstain. Members with conflicts of interest on a particular vote must abstain. Passing requires

> support from a majority of non-abstaining Council members.

Reviewer: Hm. This is inherited from PEP 13, and I think it applies a little bit less here in that packaging is a narrower field. (Also, both this document and PEP 13 fail to define what a "conflict of interest" would be, other than the rule about too many people with the same employer.) I assume you're pointing out that conflicts of interest are likely, and yes, I would expect that for most decisions everyone on the Packaging Council is likely to _have_ an interest, e.g., they're going to go implement the PEP—is that a conflict?

I would like to suggest just striking this section entirely and acknowledging that the Packaging Council is by their nature going to be involved in the work. The Steering Council always has oversight ability. (That is, this is very different from the Steering Council itself, which is explicitly chartered as a "court of final appeal.") If the Packaging Council decides, "PyPI shall only accept User-Agents matching the five package managers we write," it's obvious that the Steering Council should step in (or that, given the do-ocracy, PyPI should just ignore them). If the Packaging Council decides, "PyPI should only allow package managers that implement this type of behavior, which our five package managers have implemented, but nobody else has," there is a real possibility that this is a legitimate and technically defensible decision, and we should allow this decision to happen and trust that the community knows how to riot if the decision turns out to actually be corrupt.

Alternatively, if you want to keep this, I don't like the phrase "remaining council members" because it's probably the people who are abstaining that have the most context, and the goal of escalating the decision is to let a neutral party sign off on what's probably the right technical decision. Maybe something like, "If the Packaging Council cannot (e.g., by lack of quorum) or wishes not to come to a decision on its own, it can also vote to refer a matter to the Steering Council, whose decision on the matter will be binding. Members are deemed never to have a conflict of interest in such a vote."

> support from a majority of non-abstaining Council members.

Author: Worded slightly differently (removed the explicit vote to refer to the SC):

> To use its powers, the Packaging Council votes. Every Council member must either vote or explicitly
abstain. Members with conflicts of interest on a particular vote must abstain. Passing requires
support from a majority of non-abstaining Council members, which requires a quorum of 3
non-abstaining members.  If the Packaging Council cannot (e.g., by lack of quorum) or wishes not to
come to a decision on its own, it can also refer the matter to the Steering Council, whose decision
on the matter will be binding.

themselves or their affiliations, the mere appearance of any one such organization dominating Python
development could itself be harmful and erode trust.

PSF staff members are not permitted to serve as members of the Packaging Council.

Currently serving Steering Council members are not permitted to concurrently serve as members of the Packaging
Council.

In a Council election, if more than two of the top five vote-getters work for the same employer, then only the
top two such vote-getters are elected and the others are disqualified, with the remaining vote-getters
elevated in the vote rank.  This process is repeated until a valid Packaging Council is formed.  If after this
process a full Council cannot be formed, disqualified vote-getters are re-qualified in the rank order of their
vote tally until a full Council can be formed.

During a Packaging Council term, if changing circumstances cause this rule to be broken (for instance, due to
a Council member changing employment), then one or more Council members must resign to remedy the issue, and
the resulting vacancies can then be filled as `normal <vacancy>`_.

> .. _electors:

Reviewer 2: You have this twice, they need to be unique.

Author: Already fixed! 😄

  members <voting-members>`_.  The PSF voting membership is informed that Packaging Council ballots
  are available, and any PSF voting member can request the ballot.  The PSF may choose to solicit
  participation for both the PSF Board elections and Packaging Council elections at the same time.
  Packaging Council Electors retain their voting rights for the entire year, and may exercise such
  rights for other community-wide votes that may occur during that year.

* **Phase 2**: Packaging Council Electors may nominate any individual for the Council election, including
  themselves.  Nominees do not need to be PSF members, but nominations must include information
  about the nominee's relevant affiliations.

* **Phase 3**: Each Elector uses their ballot to cast their vote for the Council. They can
  assign zero to five stars to each candidate.  Voting is performed anonymously. The outcome of the vote is
  determined using the `STAR voting system`_, modified to use the `Multi-winner Bloc STAR`_ approach.
  If a tie occurs, it may be resolved by mutual agreement among the candidates, or else the winner will be
  chosen at random.

Each phase will last two weeks.

> The Packaging Council election process is managed by one Returning Officer nominated by the Python Steering

Reviewer: I interpreted "Returning Officer" as "a member of the Packaging Council who is returning because they are not in the cohort up for re-election." It seems this might be wildly off, in which case strong +1 to renaming.

PEP 13 uses "returns officer," which is clearer to me (an officer about returns the noun, i.e., returned ballots, not an officer involved with returning the verb, i.e., going back somewhere). In general, +1 to aligning with PEP 13 wherever possible.

Other suggestions: "election overseer," "secretary of elections," or if you feel like present-day PEPs desperately lack whimsy, "Secretary of PyThreadState."

> The Packaging Council election process is managed by one Returning Officer nominated by the Python Steering

Author: The intent was to use the same language as in PEP 13.  I'll align the 772 text to "returns officer".

Council.  The PSF shall maintain records of the elections as well as run the annual election for the
Packaging Council.

Ballots are ordinarily kept anonymous to all (including the Returning Officer) but with sufficient information
to deanonymize them.  Deanonymization requires a supermajority (two-thirds) vote of at least two of the Python
Steering Council, the PSF Board, and the current Packaging Council.  Deanonymization must only be done to
investigate the possibility of coordinated/inauthentic activity in the Packaging Council election that does

> not, in the view of the bodies that vote to deanonymize, accurately represent the Python Packaging community.

Reviewer: After thinking a bit harder, I suspect the following are fine too as simplifying measures:
* Have no provision for deanonymizing votes. Make the raw (but anonymous) ballots public. The Steering Council can always disband the Packaging Council and recreate it some other way if it seems like there's a suspicious and implausible pattern.
* Make votes public and wholly get rid of anonymity. A lot of the work is public anyway (commenting on PEPs or in d.p.o, accepting or rejecting pull requests to tools, etc.), and this mirrors the experience of, say, having people in a room and doing a voice vote, show of hands, or roll call.

> not, in the view of the bodies that vote to deanonymize, accurately represent the Python Packaging community.

Reviewer: +1, the draft I had (that I sent to Barry to incorporate the good parts of :) ) has both the paragraph that ended up in this PR and this sentence right before it: "The full results of the election, including the contents of each ballot cast, shall be public."

I would support your suggestion but changing "can be made available" to "shall be made available."

> not, in the view of the bodies that vote to deanonymize, accurately represent the Python Packaging community.

Author: Public + anonymous may or may not be workable depending on the mechanism used to conduct the bloc star election.  I talked to @ewdurbin and since we don't yet know what mechanism will be used (and in fact it may change over time), I don't want to mandate this in the PC governance PEP.

I propose instead the following text...

> The Packaging Council election process is managed by one Returning Officer nominated by the Python
Steering Council.  The PSF shall maintain records of the elections as well as run the annual
election for the Packaging Council.  The Steering Council must certify the results of the election
and may work with the Returns Officer in whatever capacity is necessary to validate the integrity of
the election.

...and we just delete all the language about deanonymizing, etc.

default.

It is expected that any deanonymization request acted on will be followed by a proposal to change this PEP in
order to address any identified irregularities that precipitated such a request.

Term
----

There shall be two cohorts of Council members: Cohort A composed of two members
and Cohort B composed of three members.

Each Council member shall be elected for a two-year term, unless they are
replacing a Council member that resigned, was removed, or otherwise becomes
vacant, in which case such replacement members shall be elected to a term
sufficient to complete a two-year term as measured from the term of the
original cohort.

Each Council member's term will be two years, from when their elections are
finalized until the next elections for their cohort are finalized.

.. _whole-council:

Only for elections involving the entire Packaging Council (such as the initial Council election), the two
candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be designated Cohort A with a two year term, and the
three candidates receiving the next highest number of votes shall be designated Cohort B with a one year term.

> There are no term limits for individual Council members.

Author: I agree in general with @geofft.  I don't think we need to put this encouragement in the constitutional document for the PC.

> I do think that part of the Council's charge is to both grow a healthy pipeline of new engaged voices / leaders

Fully agree, although again, I wouldn't put this in the PEP.  I feel exactly the same way with the Steering Council and despite enjoying serving there, I plan on encouraging some of the new leaders to run for the next election.  I have heard feedback though that some are very glad *not* to be on the SC (and I can understand that; as Carol well knows, it can take a significant amount of time and energy, not always positive!).

.. _vacancy:

Vacancies
---------

Packaging Council members may resign their position at any time.

Whenever there is a vacancy during the regular Packaging Council term, the Council may
vote to appoint a replacement to serve out the rest of the term.

> If a Council member drops out of touch and cannot be contacted for a month or

Author: I think a month is probably long enough for *no* contact.  We have the "or longer" escape hatch.  I would expect that even for an extended vacation or temporary illness there'd be some contact in a month.

longer, then the rest of the Council may vote to replace them (with a simple
majority vote, where the missing member is recorded as an abstention).

If a full Packaging Council cannot be seated by this process, the Python Steering Council can appoint new
Packaging Council members to fill the vacancies, or call for new Packaging Council elections.

Conflicts of interest
---------------------

> No more than two Packaging Council member may be employed by or significantly affiliated with the same

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
No more than two Packaging Council members may be employed by or significantly affiliated with the same
```

entity. An entity is a company and its subsidiaries, or another incorporated entity such as a non-profit or
educational institution with its own mission and goals. Significant affiliation includes, at the least,
receiving wages for current work, officer/director roles, and 25% or more ownership stake.  PSF membership at
any member class (as defined by Article IV of the PSF bylaws) does not count as an affiliation for this

> purpose.

Reviewer: I just noticed that this text is patterned after [PEP 13](https://peps.python.org/pep-0013/#conflicts-of-interest). It might be worthwhile to match that text as far as possible (or, alternatively, have this be text that we believe is suitable for an update to PEP 13).

Notably, PEP 13 just has "work for any single employer", and does not have the "significantly affiliated" text. So the question about organizational membership does not arise.

> purpose.

Author: As mentioned, the "single employer" provision in PEP 13 is pretty darn loose and left to interpretation.  E.g. what if you get an SC with members who work for Microsoft, GitHub, LinkedIn, Xamarin, and Xandr?  We've interpreted that in the past as "its subsidiaries" are disallowed even though there probably is almost no practical undue influence possible.

Should we just align PEP 772 language with PEP 13 language and leave it similarly ambiguous?

> In order to avoid any appearance of conflict of interest,
at most 2 members of the council can work for any single employer.

> In a council election, if 3 of the top 5 vote-getters work for the
same employer, then whichever of them ranked lowest is disqualified
and the 6th-ranking candidate moves up into 5th place; this is
repeated until a valid council is formed.

> During a council term, if changing circumstances cause this rule to be
broken (for instance, due to a council member changing employment),
then one or more council members must resign to remedy the issue, and
the resulting vacancies can then be filled as normal.

elevated in the vote rank.  This process is repeated until a valid Packaging Council is formed.  If after this
process a full Council cannot be formed, disqualified vote-getters are re-qualified in the rank order of their
vote tally until a full Council can be formed.

During a Packaging Council term, if changing circumstances cause this rule to be broken (for instance, due to
a Council member changing employment), then one or more Council members must resign to remedy the issue, and
the resulting vacancies can then be filled as `normal <vacancy>`_.

.. _electors:

==========================
Packaging Council Electors
==========================

----------------
Responsibilities
----------------

Packaging Council Electors participate in formal votes to elect the Packaging Council.

The eligibility of Packaging Council Electors is equivalent to the Article IV, section 4.2 voting membership
defined in the `PSF Bylaws <https://www.python.org/psf/bylaws/>`_.  Should those bylaws change in the future,
the eligibility of Packaging Council Electors will similar change to match.  As with PSF voting membership,

> Packaging Council Electors must affirm their intention to vote in Packaging Council elections every year.

Reviewer: I think it's important that this document explicitly state that the intention of this process is to invite everyone involved in the Python packaging community to participate, and we chose PSF membership because it facilitates that. (I think there's a real risk that this process is perceived as privileging the subset of the packaging community that is more closely tied to e.g. the core team and steering council. This PR, IMO, positively addresses whether the process _actually_ does, but the perception problem is just as important, in large part because it influences who will realize they're invited to vote and decide it's worth their time to do so.)

As a starting point for discussion:
```suggestion
Packaging Council Electors must affirm their intention to vote in Packaging Council elections every year.

PSF membership is used here because it is open to the broader Python
community. In particular, most people involved in doing Python
packaging work in public, including both PyPA and non-PyPA projects,
are likely to be eligible for "Contributing Membership" based on
that work, without paying any membership fee.
```

We could also put this lower in the "Elector eligibility" section below. (I'm suggesting a small tweak there but we could choose to expand that to 2-3 paragraphs with an explicit call to join.)

.. _process:

Processes
=========

Removal of a member
-------------------

In order to maintain a reasonable expectation of quorum, failure to participate in Packaging Council elections

> for two consecutive council elections automatically removes a person from the list of Packaging Council

Reviewer 2: This was made uppercase elsewhere:
```suggestion
for two consecutive Council elections automatically removes a person from the list of Packaging Council
```

Author: Wrapping was a struggle actually.  I noticed some wrapping bugs in my IDE and just didn't want to shave the yak.

Electors, until they re-submit their intention to resume their participation to the Packaging Council in
writing.

In exceptional circumstances, it may be necessary to remove someone from the Electors against their will (for
example: egregious and ongoing code of conduct violations). An Elector may be removed by a two-thirds majority

> vote by the Packaging Council (in practice: 4:1 for a council with five members).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
vote by the Packaging Council (in practice: 4:1 for a Council with five members).
```

> In exceptional circumstances, it may be necessary to remove someone from the Electors against their will (for
> example: egregious and ongoing code of conduct violations). An Elector may be removed by a two-thirds majority
> vote by the Packaging Council (in practice: 4:1 for a Council with five members).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In exceptional circumstances, it may be necessary to remove someone from the Electors against their will (for
example: egregious and ongoing code of conduct violations). An Elector may be removed by a two-thirds majority
vote by the Packaging Council (in practice: 4:1 for a Council with five members).

In such a case, the former Elector may not rejoin unless approved by another
two-thirds majority vote by the Packaging Council.
```

Reviewer: It occurs to me this comes from the PEP 13 text about removing a core dev, which is important because being a core dev is a role with responsibilities in its own right, not just electing the SC. Since the only thing an Elector can do is vote people onto or off the Packaging Council, since the goal is to have a lot of Electors so no single vote is particularly significant, and since there is already a mechanism for removal of PSF membership ([bylaws](https://www.python.org/psf/bylaws/) 4.15, 2/3 of PSF voting members present at a meeting or majority of the Board), what if we just strike this whole section?

Author: WFM!

> vote by the Packaging Council (in practice: 4:1 for a Council with five members).

Author: I think this one can be resolved as well given the current rewrite of this section.

> If the relevant Elector is also on the Packaging Council, then they can participate in the vote. They are

Reviewer 3: If the individual removed from the Electors roll is also on the Packaging Council, they lose the privilege to vote in future elections. The seated Packaging Council may vote to remove the individual from the Council, and the individual must abstain from a removal vote. The vacancy ...

Reviewer: I don't follow this. (An individual removed from the Electors roll always loses the privilege to vote in future elections, regardless of who that individual is, because that's what it means to be removed. Also the Packaging Council was the body that voted to remove them as an Elector; why vote twice, and possibly differently, to keep them on the Council?)

Author: I think this thread can also be resolved, given the commented text is outdated.

removed from the Packaging Council if the vote removes them as an Elector. The vacancy is filled as per the
`normal process <vacancy>`_.

Vote of no confidence
---------------------

In exceptional circumstances, the Electors may remove a sitting Council member, or the entire Council, via a
vote of no confidence.

A no-confidence vote is triggered when an Elector calls for one publicly on an appropriate public

> communication channel, and another Elector seconds the call within one week.

Reviewer: Now that we are opening up membership widely, is this still the right threshold? As written, it costs $50 for anyone in the world to make a no-confidence vote happen, regardless of their affiliation with Python.

Reviewer 3: It may make most sense to allow anyone, regardless of their affiliation with Python, to call a vote of no confidence. It must be seconded by an Elector.

Reviewer: I was actually just about to suggest the other direction—anyone on the Steering Council, and no one else, can call a vote of no confidence, no second required. The vote itself is held by the Electors. Anyone regardless of affiliation is allowed to ask the Steering Council to do so; whether they listen is likely influenced by, e.g., was there a d.p.o post and how did people respond. (And, if it's helpful, the specific Steering Councillor who made the call doesn't have to be public.)

Mostly I think that we would like to open the Electorate widely, which means 1) there's no threshold of established trust in any individual Elector and they shouldn't be able to troll / inconvenience everyone else for no reason (as opposed to the version of this document in HEAD where each voting member was there because someone trusted them), and 2) the commitment from Electors should be as light as possible, I don't want there to be any sort of packaging-electors@ mailing list that people feel like they need to read or they won't sign up. You click a button in the PSF membership webapp once a year to get the ballot, you vote, and that's it.

Author: I like that a vote of no confidence must be initiated by the SC, and anyone (an elector or otherwise) can request the SC to call that vote.  I kind of dislike putting too much non-technical burden on the SC as it is, but given that _this_ PEP already leans on the SC as a backstop, I think that position makes sense.

Proposed text:

> In exception circumstances, a vote of no confidence may be called to remove a sitting Packaging
Council member, or the entire council.  The Python Steering Council may call such votes of no
confidence, with no second being necessary.  Anyone may request such a vote of no confidence from
the Steering Council, regardless of the requester's membership or affiliation, and the Steering
Council has full discretion to call for the vote or not.

The vote lasts for two weeks. Each Elector votes for or against. If at least two thirds of Electors express a
lack of confidence, then the vote succeeds. Quorum for a vote of no confidence is 50% of Electors.

> There are two forms of no-confidence votes: those targeting a single member, and those targeting the Council
> as a whole. The initial call for a no-confidence vote must specify which type is intended. If a single-member
> vote succeeds, then that member is removed from the Council and the resulting vacancy can be handled by the
> `normal process <vacancy>`_. If a whole-Council vote succeeds, the Council is dissolved and a new Council
> election is triggered immediately, using the rules for `whole Council <whole-council>`_ elections.

Reviewer: Because we are now opening membership very widely, let's rate-limit these votes:

```suggestion
There are two forms of no-confidence votes: those targeting a single member, and those targeting the Council
as a whole. The initial call for a no-confidence vote must specify which type is intended. If a single-member
vote succeeds, then that member is removed from the Council and the resulting vacancy can be handled by the
`normal process <vacancy>`_. If a whole-Council vote succeeds, the Council is dissolved and a new Council
election is triggered immediately, using the rules for `whole Council <whole-council>`_ elections.

If a no-confidence vote fails, another identical no-confidence
vote (that is, of the same form, and against the same member for
the first form) may not be raised for six months from the initial
call.
```

Processes
=========

Election of the Packaging Council
---------------------------------

A Packaging Council election consists of the following phases:

* **Phase 1**: Packaging Council Electors are determined by opt-in self-selection of the `PSF voting
  members <voting-members>`_.  The PSF voting membership is informed that Packaging Council ballots
  are available, and any PSF voting member can request the ballot.  The PSF may choose to solicit
  participation for both the PSF Board elections and Packaging Council elections at the same time.
  Packaging Council Electors retain their voting rights for the entire year, and may exercise such
  rights for other community-wide votes that may occur during that year.

* **Phase 2**: Packaging Council Electors may nominate any individual for the Council election, including
  themselves.  Nominees do not need to be PSF members, but nominations must include information
  about the nominee's relevant affiliations.

* **Phase 3**: Each Elector uses their ballot to cast their vote for the Council. They can

>   assign zero to five stars to each candidate.  Voting is performed anonymously. The outcome of the vote is

Reviewer: I just realized that we didn't really define ballots (related to the other thread about ballot access), and so this is actually a little bit out of order. At the minimum, we should say that "ballots _will be_ available," not "are," because at phase 1 we definitely don't know who's on the ballot (unless the idea is we're using fully write-in ballots? but I imagine that is not the case). And it might be worth saying somewhere in phase 2 or 3 that the ballot consists of all nominees, or something.

Also, since we're opening up the electorate, just double-checking because I don't think we discussed this - are we okay with unseconded nominations? Specifically, do we have a technical worry about an unmanageable number of long-shot nominees? We could even require multiple seconds. On the other hand, OSI has a similar model of letting the general public join and nominate, I don't think they require seconds, and I don't think they have had problems with too many nominees.

Also, do nominees need to affirmatively accept their nomination? (We could make this the responsibility of the nominator, to keep things technically simple.)

Reviewer 2: > On the other hand, OSI has a similar model of letting the general public join and nominate, I don't think they require seconds, 

Correct, no seconds needed for nomination of OSI affiliate or individual directors. Although they do have a safety net in that elections are advisory with the board deciding on appointments. And there's a third category of directors appointed by the board without community input via elections.

https://opensource.org/about/board-of-directors/elections

> and I don't think they have had problems with too many nominees.

Yes, seems they have a reasonable number. This [year](https://fossforce.com/2025/03/osis-roster-of-board-election-candidates-doesnt-include-faraone/) had 12 or 13 total candidates for three seats. [2023](https://opensource.org/blog/meet-the-2023-candidates-for-osis-board) had nine candidates for three seats.

Author: > we should say that "ballots _will be_ available," not "are,"

Good catch.

> it might be worth saying somewhere in phase 2 or 3 that the ballot consists of all nominees, or something.

Yes, another good catch.  I'll change it to read:

> **Phase 3**: Each Elector receives a ballot consisting of all eligible nominees, which Electors
  use to cast their vote for the Packaging Council. 

About seconding nominees:

> Also, since we're opening up the electorate, just double-checking because I don't think we discussed this - are we okay with unseconded nominations? Specifically, do we have a technical worry about an unmanageable number of long-shot nominees? We could even require multiple seconds. On the other hand, OSI has a similar model of letting the general public join and nominate, I don't think they require seconds, and I don't think they have had problems with too many nominees.

PEP 13 doesn't requiring seconding, but then the population of potential nominators is smaller.  

PSF Board nominations apparently [don't require seconding either](https://wiki.python.org/psf/NewMembershipModel#Nominations_to_the_Board).

Let's not add it for PC nominations.

> Also, do nominees need to affirmatively accept their nomination? (We could make this the responsibility of the nominator, to keep things technically simple.)

Yes, let's keep it simple.  There's always a [Sherman statement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shermanesque_statement) escape hatch.

the resulting vacancies can then be filled as `normal <vacancy>`_.

.. _electors:

==========================
Packaging Council Electors
==========================

----------------
Responsibilities
----------------

Packaging Council Electors participate in formal votes to elect the Packaging Council.

The eligibility of Packaging Council Electors is equivalent to the Article IV, section 4.2 voting
membership defined in the `PSF Bylaws <https://www.python.org/psf/bylaws/>`_.  Should those bylaws
change in the future, the eligibility of Packaging Council Electors will similarly change to match.
As with PSF voting membership, Packaging Council Electors must affirm their intention to vote in
Packaging Council elections every year.

.. _process:

Processes
=========

Removal of a member
-------------------

In order to maintain a reasonable expectation of quorum, failure to participate in Packaging Council elections
for two consecutive Council elections automatically removes a person from the list of Packaging Council
Electors, until they re-submit their intention to resume their participation to the Packaging Council in
writing.

Vote of no confidence
---------------------

> In exception circumstances, a vote of no confidence may be called to remove a sitting Packaging

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In exceptional circumstances, a vote of no confidence may be called to remove a sitting Packaging
```

Author: Thanks!  Fixed locally to avoid merge conflicts.

Each phase will last two weeks.

The Packaging Council election process is managed by a returns officer nominated by the Python
Steering Council.  The PSF shall maintain records of the elections as well as run the annual
election for the Packaging Council.  The Steering Council must certify the results of the election
and may work with the returns officer in whatever capacity is necessary to validate the integrity of

> the election.

Reviewer: I love this simplification. That said, I would like to see at least full vote totals (if not raw anonymous ballots) be public and not just a list of winners, if that's not too hard of a thing to require technically. Also, given [the OSI kerfuffle](https://codeberg.org/OSI-Concerns/election-results-2025/), I would like to see full vote totals _before_ any exclusions, for e.g. conflicts of interest or invalid nominations because someone was disqualified as an Elector, and given the kerfuffle, as much as I trust the people running this to work in good faith, I think it's good to have that as a requirement.

Also, speaking of the OSI thing, I wonder if it's worth having a rule that once a nomination is presumed valid / once a candidate is on the ballot, they cannot lose ballot access because the nominator turned out not to be a valid Elector or whatever.

Author: On the first topic, very much +1 so I've added this:

> Election transparency being of paramount importance for trust in the process, full
vote totals *before* any exclusions, while maintaining anonymity, should be made public when
technically possible.

I don't want to constrain our election process too much since we're still working out the details and mechanics.  I know it's a bit weasel wordy, but hopefully this gives us some flexibility for now but still points us to do the right thing.

> Also, speaking of the OSI thing, I wonder if it's worth having a rule that once a nomination is presumed valid / once a candidate is on the ballot, they cannot lose ballot access because the nominator turned out not to be a valid Elector or whatever.

Are you worried that a) elector nominates a person; b) that elector is disqualified before the vote; c) the person they nominated gets kicked off the ballot?  I think that's *probably* not going to be a problem because it would probably be well advertised and the electors can still decide not to vote for that person, if they think that's a valid reason not to.  Plus the SC still has to certify the election.  So I think I'll leave that out for now.

Conflicts of interest
---------------------

No more than two Packaging Council members may be employed by the same entity. An entity is a
company and its subsidiaries, or another incorporated entity such as a non-profit or educational
institution with its own mission and goals. Significant affiliation includes, at the least,
receiving compensation for current work, officer/director roles, and 25% or more ownership stake.
PSF membership at any member class (as defined by Article IV of the PSF bylaws) does not count as an

> affiliation for this purpose.

Reviewer: I like the updated spirit of this paragraph.

We no longer use the term "significantly affiliated" so the last two sentences defining it are somewhat UnboundLocalError. In particular, I am inclined to wholly strike the last sentence, which came about because PSF membership could potentially fall under "affiliated" but certainly not "employed". How about:

> No more than two Packaging Council members may be employed by or have decision-making power over the same entity. An entity is a company and its subsidiaries, or another incorporated entity such as a non-profit or educational institution with its own mission and goals. For this purpose, being "employed" includes other forms of receiving compensation for current work, and having "decision-making power over" an entity includes holding officer/director roles and 25% or more ownership stake.

Author: I like it, and agree that we don't need to carve out PSF membership any more.  Do you think that the definition of "employed by" would include contractors who receive compensation for related work?  I'm going to add a phrase to your suggested text:

> For this purpose, "employed by" includes other forms of receiving compensation for current work regardless of workforce classification

Note "workforce classification" which seems (at least in the US) to be a common way to describe FTEs, W-2 employees, and contractors.

Reviewer: > Do you think that the definition of "employed by" would include contractors who receive compensation for related work? 

It definitely _should_ include someone (like me :) ) who has a single-member LLC that is the legal party to a contract with an employer for specific work. For our purposes, they absolutely should be considered "employed by" the other party to that contract, even if legally they are not. I think that's the natural reading of the current phrasing, especially with "regardless of workforce classification," but we can make it even more explicit if that seems ambiguous.

For someone who is employed by a consultancy that has them placed approximately full time at a large company for a few months or longer, which is something that definitely happens in the scientific Python and packaging spaces, I'm not sure if they should be considered "employed by" the large company too. I'd lean probably yes. Arguably this is covered by the current phrasing, in the sense that they are indeed receiving compensation for their specific work from the large company, albeit indirectly.

For someone who receives GitHub sponsorship for a company, or money through a Tidelift subscription, or makes a product or SaaS that they sell to the company, I think they should not be considered employed by that company. I think the current phrasing is probably fine; in the first two cases, they're at most receiving compensation for _past_ work and have the freedom to do whatever currently, and in the latter case, they're compensated for goods/services, not for work.

Electors, until they re-submit their intention to resume their participation to the Packaging Council in
writing.

Vote of no confidence
---------------------

In exception circumstances, a vote of no confidence may be called to remove a sitting Packaging
Council member, or the entire council.  The Python Steering Council may call such votes of no
confidence, with no second being necessary.  Anyone may request such a vote of no confidence from
the Steering Council, regardless of the requester's membership or affiliation, and the Steering
Council has full discretion to call for the vote or not.

The vote of no confidence lasts for two weeks. Each Elector votes for or against. If at least two
thirds of Electors express a lack of confidence, then the vote succeeds. Quorum for a vote of no

> confidence is 50% of Electors.

Reviewer: There is no longer a definition of quorum for regular votes of the Electors; the document just points out the need to keep it, and defines quorum for a vote of no confidence. I think, given the "affirm their intention every" thing, that we can unify quorum for these two. (I didn't want votes of no confidence to have quorum being people who request a ballot _for that vote of no confidence_ because that can be unduly small, but now it's going to be everyone who voted last regular election, too.) Should we add under "Processes" a sentence saying "Quorum for a vote is 50% of all Electors." and get rid of that sentence here?

A question on intent - if you have affirmed your intention to vote last year, and did vote, but you did not affirm your intention to vote (request a ballot), are you an Elector / do you count towards quorum?

Author: I see what you're saying.  Yes, I think it makes sense to unify quorum as suggested.

> Quorum for Packaging Council votes (either cohort election or votes of no confidence) is 50% of
Electors.

On your question, the "Removal of a member" paragraph under "Processes" says:

> In order to maintain a reasonable expectation of quorum, failure to participate in Packaging Council elections
for two consecutive Council elections automatically removes a person from the list of Packaging Council
Electors, until they re-submit their intention to resume their participation to the Packaging Council in
writing.

But actually, I think we don't need this.  You still have to opt-in to be an Elector, so if you don't do it for a year, you're just not an Elector for that year.  If you do it for two consecutive years, well, you're just not an Elector for those two years.  You don't lose PSF membership, which is the folks that get to opt-in for PC ballots every year.  As long as you're a PSF member, you can vote in this year's PC election if you want.  So this paragraph isn't really ever applicable and has no teeth either.

I suggest removing the whole paragraph.

There are two forms of no-confidence votes: those targeting a single member, and those targeting the Council
as a whole. The initial call for a no-confidence vote must specify which type is intended. If a single-member
vote succeeds, then that member is removed from the Council and the resulting vacancy can be handled by the
`normal process <vacancy>`_. If a whole-Council vote succeeds, the Council is dissolved and a new Council
election is triggered immediately, using the rules for `whole Council <whole-council>`_ elections.

If a no-confidence vote fails, another identical no-confidence vote (that is, of the same form, and
against the same member for the first form) may not be raised for six months from the initial call.

> 

Reviewer: Sorry to go back and forth on this, but now that it's the Steering Council triggering these, we don't really need a rate limit. (But we can keep it too, it's fine.)

Author: Good call.  Agreed it's unnecessary, so I'm going to strike it.

Elector eligibility
-------------------

Previous iterations of this PEP's draft proposed different membership rules for identifying the
Packaging Council Electors.  After extensive discussion among stakeholders, and after seeking the
widest possible feedback, the PEP authors agreed that aligning Packaging Council Electors with PSF
Board voting membership was both the most workable arrangement and the most equitable approach to
include all parts of the Python packaging community.

> PSF membership is used here because it is open to the broadest possible Python community. In
> particular, most people doing Python packaging work, do so in public, including contributing to both
> PyPA and non-PyPA projects, are likely to be eligible for PSF "Contributing Membership" based on
> that work, without paying any membership fee.

Reviewer: small grammar fix, small wording fix

```suggestion
PSF membership is used here because it is open to the broadest possible Python community. In
particular, most people doing Python packaging work in public, including contributing to
PyPA or non-PyPA projects, are likely to be eligible for PSF "Contributing Membership" based on
that work, without paying any membership fee.
```

Author: Thanks.  I agree with the `s/and/or/` and the removal of "both".  The other grammar change was in a previous version and it didn't parse well for me so that's why I changed it.  But I get that my attempt was probably also inelegant.  Here's what I settled on:

> PSF membership is used here because it is open to the broadest possible Python community. In
particular, most people doing Python packaging work do such work in public, including contributing
to PyPA or non-PyPA projects, and are likely to be eligible for PSF "Contributing Membership" based
on that work without paying any membership fee.

because of the size of the pool of interested and qualified people who might
serve.

-------------------
Elector eligibility
-------------------

Previous iterations of this PEP's draft proposed different membership rules for identifying the Packaging
Council Electors.  After extensive discussion among stakeholders, and after seeking the widest possible
feedback, the PEP authors agreed that aligning Packaging Council Electors with PSF Board voting membership was

> both the most equitable and most workable arrangement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
both the most workable arrangement and the most equitable approach
to include all parts of the Python packaging community.
```
